once you hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explain where
we'll be taking a look at some of the
more ambiguous and discussed movie
endings that have left audiences
debating their true meaning long after
the credits of role previously on movie
endings explained we've tackled a number
of Christopher Nolan's films as
traditionally they tend to feature
perplexing or thought-provoking endings
from The Dark Knight Rises to inception
and even into Stella
there are plenty of ideas and theories
to talk about and we have done in this
series yet there's still more to mine
from Christopher Nolan's filmography if
we cast our minds back to 2006 at which
point the celebrated master director
didn't have quite the reputation he has
now he was renowned of course and his
previous film Batman Begins had gone
down very well but when he released the
prestige it was with significantly less
pomp and circumstance though the film
itself is all about that kind of
showmanship the prestige is set in 1890s
London and follows two stage magicians
rubber and Gia played by Hugh Jackman
and Alfred Borden played by Christian
Bale in an unfortunate accident that
Andrea blames Borden for his wife Julia
drowned during a magic trick gone wrong
inside a water tank an gia and Borden
splinter apart and form an intense
rivalry board and find success with a
trick he calls the transported man where
he enters a cabinet and re-emerges from
another on the other side of the stage
in a matter of seconds we see an Gaea in
disguise attend one of Borden shows to
see the trick in the flesh he proclaims
it the greatest trick he has ever seen
but can't quite figure out how board and
pulled it off angeas assistant cutter
played by michael caine insists the key
to the trick is using a double but an
gia dismisses this as too simple
dreadful magician no he's a wonderful
magician he's a dreadful showman he
doesn't know how to dress it up how how
does he do it
use a double no no no it's too simple
this is a complex solution you only say
that because you don't know the method
it's a double that comes out at the end
it's the only way I've seen him perform
the trick three times now mr. Carter the
prestige is the same man no no the same
man comes out of that second cabinet I
promise you it's the same man he wears
padded gloves sides is damaged fingers
but if you look closely it is a key
detail to this sequence of the film is
that we don't see the reveal of board
and re-emerging from the other cabinet
only the reactions of both Andrea and
cutter watching from the audience while
an gia is amazed an envious cutter
remains fairly unimpressed as Olivia
angeas assistant pointed out the Borden
that reappeared on the other side of the
stage also showed signs of missing two
fingers so it couldn't possibly be a
look-alike as Borden has two missing
fingers still an gia finds his own
double Gerald root who looks remarkably
like an gia but is an alcoholic and
difficult to work with nevertheless he
goes ahead with his new transported man
show but finds that he has to be the one
to set up the act with his showmanship
skills and spend the payoff of the trick
offstage while Gerald root soaks up all
the attention still not satisfied
an gia travels to meet with Nikola Tesla
played by David Bowie believing that
Tesla had created a machine for Borden
to create a double artificially and so
eventually an gia debuts the real
transported man act and clones himself
on stage every single night Borden can't
understand how the trick is done and
goes backstage one night to find out
[Music]
angio supposedly drowns in the water
tank while his new clone ends up on the
balcony and boardin is framed for angeas
murder the whole movie is framed around
this murder with Borden being in
president on trial and the majority of
the story being told in flashback at the
very end of the film an Gaea comes to
meet Borden in prison under the alias of
lord caldlow Borden who is set to be
hung for his murder is disgusted by what
angio has done as his cutter who had
mourned over angeas death Borden then
says goodbye to his assistant Fallon and
is hung to death cold low or an Gaea
perhaps is set to destroy the cloning
machine when he gets shot by Fallon or
is it Borden
that's right
we both fan
we were both border
we don't want to win it into the box or
the one who came back out
the trick is where we were swamped
you cut in you but I told him it was too
simple too easy
simple my paper no easy
of an easy about two men share my life
so hidden in plain sight was Bolden's
key to the transported man trick his
twin brother they both took turns
playing Fallon and committed themselves
to a life of secrecy but also sacrifice
and Gaea dies and we end the film over a
voice over from Qatar that we heard at
the beginning of the film
now you're looking for the secret
but you won't find it because of course
you're not really looking
you don't breathe it to work it out
we want to be
thus we end the film on a shot of angeas
many dead clones suspended in water
tanks dumped in an empty theater which
is about as symbolic as it gets but
cutters voiceover suggests there's more
to the story right we knew that angio
was cloning himself every night and in
some twisted sick penance for the guilty
feels over the death of his wife was
drowning himself every night too
it begs the question why didn't angio
just clone himself once and have his
very own double to pull off the same
trick than Borden had why the endless
cycle of killing and copying himself the
difference between the two is that
Borden was able to make the sacrifice of
living both a double life and a half
life an Jia could never do that when he
first clones himself he has a pistol
ready to kill his double he looks
frightened not capable to even try and
talk to his clone and yet while he could
seemingly never make the sacrifice of
living a dual life with one double he
was able to make the sacrifice of
killing himself every night however the
entrapment of Borden to the murder of an
Jia is clearly Biodesign and so perhaps
the sole purpose for killing himself
every single night was to wait for the
right moment when Borden would sneak
backstage and to finally exact his
ultimate revenge on the man he blames
for his wife's death but back to the
final voiceover did we miss anything
anything that wasn't already laid out by
Borden in the final scene between the
two rivals ultimately I don't think so
and the conclusion of the film is
actually fairly clear cuts yet it does
invite you to think that you've missed
something that there is something more
another layer to the mystery that will
never be discovered because it isn't
there the words cutter say are summing
up the whole story almost breaking the
fourth wall and speaking to us the
audience about it for more context
listen to his opening narration closely
every magic trick consists of three
parts or acts first part is called the
pledge new magician shows you something
ordinary deck of cards a bird or may
[Music]
the socially subjective perhaps the
option to inspecting to see them is it
true about course it probably isn't
[Music]
the second act is called the turn
the magician takes the ordinary
something and makes it do some
extraordinary
yeah you're looking for the secret but
you won't find it because your coats
you're not really looking we don't
really want to know
want to be food but you wouldn't clap
yet because making something disappear
isn't enough you have to bring it back
that's why every magic trick has a third
act the hardest part the part we call
the prestige so the way I interpret the
film and its ending and its message is
that the whole movie is the prestige the
three acts of a magic trick the three
acts of a movie
the cloning plot is fantastical smoke
and mirrors while it's vital to the
story of course the real trick is how
Borden pulled off the transported man
when you first view the movie you likely
get so wrapped up in it that your mind
wanders from that point and you become
more engaged in the flashy idea of an GA
actually cloning himself and the real
skill to the trick that Borden was
Fallon and Fallon's was Borden was
really hinted at all along the entire
movie is foreshadowing and payoff in the
scene where angio is going through
Borden's diary it reads we were two
young men at the start of a great career
two young men devoted to an illusion two
young men who never intended to hurt
anyone
angeas perspective on this imagines that
to be himself and Borden but really it
means Borden and his brother
Fallon early on Borden is on stage
during a disappearing and reappearing
bird trick a young boy in the audience
is upset by the trick and Borden tries
to come for him when the boy asks where
the birds brother is meaning the double
watch Borden's telling reaction the boy
seeing through the trick hits a little
bit too close to home in another scene
Angie I'm bored and go to see Chung Ling
so a magician who can make a full fish
tank disappear on stage afterwards they
spot him leaving the building and Borden
admires his commitment to the illusion
his total devotion to the Arts he's
pretending to be a [ __ ] Borden
respects it for a reason while an Gia
scoffs he can't fathom the idea of
committing to being someone
24/7 and even tells his wife it's
unthinkable which is why he never
suspects that that is how warden pulled
off his transported man trick and his
utter disbelief that it could be as
simple as using a double tricks us into
believing that two wardens wife Sara
even says that when he tells her he
loves her she can tell sometimes he
doesn't mean it
because sometimes he's not himself his
relationship with his wife is peppered
with clues and little details throughout
the entire film the reveal at the end
that Borden or even Fallon went through
with hacking off his own two fingers
also to maintain the double illusion is
hinted at when Sarah is redressing his
hand and says I don't understand how can
it be bleeding again let's go back to
the very first line of the movie spoken
by Borden are you watching closely the
entire movie four shadows it's reveal
but what be the fun in it if you've
figured it out so soon as cutter says
you're not really looking for it because
you want to be fooled and I think most
of us do there are quite a few wild
theories out there about the prestige
that all feel a bit too far-fetched from
my personal tastes but are nevertheless
going to be explored by those who find
the yearning for something even more
from the film one is that the Tesla
cloning machine was never real and the
movie is simply tricking us into
believing something so fantastical could
be real that just seems like quite a
hollow and unsatisfying idea to me
personally as are most of the theories
revolving around the film the 1995 book
written by British writer Christopher
priest plays a little more differently
than its movie adaptation towards the
end I won't break it down fully but
Borden turns off the cloning device
halfway through one of angeas
performances and his clone becomes
incomplete a ghostly duplicate and weak
he becomes terminally ill and his
duplicate seeks revenge by killing
Borden the original Andrea passes away
and his duplicate tries to transport
himself into the original angeas body
it's then hinted at in an ambiguous way
that some form of an Gaea continued to
exist into present-day I don't know
about you but I think I prefer the movie
version but what did you think of the
prestige is ending and reveal do you
think there's more to the picture
something everyone else is missed let us
know in the comment section down below
stay tuned to the Joe Blow videos
channel for more original videos like
this and as always thanks for watching
[Music]